Dear Authors,

We are very happy to inform you that the above named paper has been accepted for the proceedings of FM 2008. As usual, the competition was very stiff and we had 106 submissions, of which 23 were finally accepted for the programme. We include below the reviews of your submission and want you to take full account of the reviews to produce a final version of the submission for publication. We will again use EasyChair for the *final submission* and we will send you final instructions for this submission very soon.  THE DEADLINE FOR THIS FINAL SUBMISSION WILL BE *Feb 29th*.

We hope very much that your participation will contribute to another very successful FM meeting. Please keep your eye on the conference web page (http://www.fm2008.abo.fi/) for programme and other information related to the conference.

See you in Turku!

Jorge and Tom
FM'08 Co-Chairs

---------



---------------------------------------------

Paper: 70
Title: A rigorous approach to networking: TCP, from implementation to protocol to service


-------------------- review 1 --------------------

OVERALL RATING: 0 (borderline paper)
----------------------- REVIEW --------------------

Review form

1) What problem(s) does the paper tackle?   What are the main idea of
the proposal solution(s)?

The paper tackles the question of how to tie together implementations
with models of protocols at various layers.  This paper is one of a series
by the authors on this topic, focusing TCP and testing implementations.
The focus in this paper is on service-level specifications.


2) Topic and Content: Is the topic suitable for FM'08?  What are the
contributions of the paper?  How would you rate the technical quality
of the paper?  Does the paper represent original work?

The paper is absolutely on topic.    The paper is more a review
of what they have done than a technical paper.  No formal claims are
made.  The approach taken, builds upon their previous work and is
of course related to a vast amount of research from the testing community.


3) Presentation: Is the paper accurate, precise and rigorous?  Is the
technical content accessible to non-specialists of the domain or
notation?  Does the introduction clearly state the background and
motivation?  Is the abstract an appropriate and adequate digest of the
work presented?  Is the bibliography adequate? Is related work
properly discussed?  Is the English satisfactory?  (Write in the next line)

There are no technical results presented.  As for the description
of the methodology taken: I found it NOT particularly easy to follow.
The authors quickly take the reader into lots of details about TCP
The methodology they took is more-or-less hidden among all the
technical details.   Missing is a section that clearly outlines the general
methodology here, properties it is believe to have, etc.    Some details
were simply not clear to me, such as the generation of the test cases
itself.   Perhaps these are described in other papers of the authors???


4) Please highlight any further strong points and weak points of the paper.

Strong points: they are addressing a real problem in its full complexity.
Weak points: lack of clarity about the methodology taken.


5) Please provide constructive comments to help author improve the
paper. (Write in the next line)

I add a new section (early on, e.g., 2 or even as part of the intro) clearly outlining, as abstractly
as possible the general methodology taken and use it to structure your presentation
of the remaining details.


-------------------- review 2 --------------------

OVERALL RATING: 2 (accept)
----------------------- REVIEW --------------------

Review form


1) What problem(s) does the paper tackle?   What are the main idea of
the proposal solution(s)?
(Write in the next line(s), inserting new lines if required).
The main problem addressed in this paper is the specification of
real-world protocols; in particular, TCP. The author's have
previously published several papers describing a detailed HOL
specification of the TCP implementation.  This paper
describes a new TCP service-level specification that
defines what service a TCP  implementation  provides to the
the socket interface. An abstraction function relates the
low-level specification. The scale of both the low-level and
high-level specifications means that it  is not practical to
apply either model checking or theorem proving to verify the
abstraction function. Instead, the authors generate traces from
protocol runs on a testbed and validate the models against these
traces.


2) Topic and Content: Is the topic suitable for FM'08?  What are the
contributions of the paper?  How would you rate the technical quality
of the paper?  Does the paper represent original work? (Write in the next line)

This topic is definitely suitable for FM08. The technical quality of the
paper is quite good. The immediate contribution is the specification of
TCP Socket services and the abstraction function that maps between
the low-level specification and a high-level specification and the validation.



3) Presentation: Is the paper accurate, precise and rigorous?  Is the
technical content accessible to non-specialists of the domain or
notation?  Does the introduction clearly state the background and
motivation?  Is the abstract an appropriate and adequate digest of the
work presented?  Is the bibliography adequate? Is related work
properly discussed?  Is the English satisfactory?  (Write in the next line)

The paper does meet standards of accuracy and rigor and
the writing more than satisfactory. The abstract and bibliography
are satisfactory.

There is a presumption that the reader is familiar with
some of the basics of TCP. A reader completely unfamiliar with
the basic terminology (SYN, SYNACK, socket) would probably
have a difficult time reading the paper.



4) Please highlight any further strong points and weak points of the paper.

The strongest point of the paper is the overall methodology employed
and that the authors applied it to a protocol as complex as TCP.
In performing this work, the authors  help blunt the, often  apt,
criticism that formal methods only applied to small problems.

5) Please provide constructive comments to help author improve the
paper. (Write in the next line)

A brief description of TCP terminology used in the paper would
be welcome to those who have not done socket programming in a while.

Section 4. The Abstraction Function could stand some revision
even if further prose comes at the expense of Figure 4, which might
be squeezed into columns to give more room for text.

The system presented in this paper can be used as a basis for
conformance testing. It would have been interesting if this had
been used to test say one of the newer implementations of the
TCP stack (say for real-time OSes) or even the implementation
reported in citation  [13].

 Both the low-level protocol specification and the
service-level specification are about 30,000 lines of HOL - quite
 a feat in and of itself - and I suspect that emacs and svn
were probably the only tools used in support of this effort.
Although the authors advocate the use of their technique in
further protocol developments, it is not clear additional
tool support would not be needed in order to make that practical.


-------------------- review 3 --------------------

OVERALL RATING: 2 (accept)
----------------------- REVIEW --------------------

Review form

1) What problem(s) does the paper tackle?   What are the main idea of the proposal solution(s)?
(Write in the next line(s), inserting new lines if required).

This paper tackles the problem of rigorously specifying TCP.  Based on the
author's previous work on low-level specs of TCP internals, this paper
proposes a high-level, end-to-end specification of TCP and validates that
the low-level spec implements it.

2) Topic and Content: Is the topic suitable for FM'08?  What are the
contributions of the paper?  How would you rate the technical quality
of the paper?  Does the paper represent original work? (Write in the next line)

The topic is suitable for FM'08.  The main contributions are:

a) a high-level specification of TCP
   (in contrast to the previous low-level spec)
b) validation of correspondence between the high-level and low-level specs.

The technical quality is high and this paper definitely represent original work.

3) Presentation: Is the paper accurate, precise and rigorous?  Is the
technical content accessible to non-specialists of the domain or
notation?  Does the introduction clearly state the background and
motivation?  Is the abstract an appropriate and adequate digest of the
work presented?  Is the bibliography adequate? Is related work
properly discussed?  Is the English satisfactory?  (Write in the next line)

The paper is accurate, precise and rigorous.
The technical content is accessible to non-specialists of the domain or
notation, although to fully understand it, one should be familar with the
authors' previous work.
The introduction clearly states the background and motivation.
The abstract is appropriate and adequate.
Related work is well discussed.
The English is great.

4) Please highlight any further strong points and weak points of the paper.

The amount of work accomplished by the authors is quite impressive.
Overall, I like the service-level spec and the overall architecture of
their formal framework. In fact, I think this spec should have been written
down as the first step when this line of work is started, before working on
the protocol-level details! I think this paper is a good move towards the
right direction in the line of work on formalizing TCP.

I think these points already make it a good paper. I do have some more
thoughts about the paper but I wouldn't list it as a weak point --- see my
comments below.

5) Please provide constructive comments to help author improve the
paper. (Write in the next line)

My major question is: can we make this work more ¡°formal¡±?  Maybe not
in this paper, but in the future work! You have verified (in your
previous work) that the protocol-level spec admits thousands of traces
generated in real-world systems; this paper used similar techniques to
verify the relationships between the service-level and protocol-level
specs. Although I agree that trace validation is the appropriate technique
in the former case, I think the latter could, and should, be made more
rigorous for a number of reasons:

* Both specs are already written precisely in HOL; it seems a shame
  if we can¡¯t prove anything about them!
* The service-level and protocol-level specs are very similar in their
  nature: the rules are almost in one-to-one mapping and the relationship
  between the two specs does not seem very difficult to understand.

Of course, the devil is in all the details. I agree with you that any
formal reasoning at this scale is nontrivial and the trace-based
validation is a reasonable choice to begin with. But, without a
rigorous proof, the trace validation can only show that the
protocol-level spec "probably" implements TCP, which itself is not a
very interesting statement. There are other informal ways to show this
too --- for example, using the protocol-level spec as a reference to
build a working TCP implementation.  After all, I think the ultimate
goal is not to verify whether the spec implements TCP faithfully, but
rather to eliminate bugs in the low-level spec.  My personal opinion
is that, even a tiny amount of formal proof would be a huge advance in
this line of work.  It could mean a lot of work, but it could also
discover much more bugs in the spec.

